docs(www): First Touch Maintenance (#12406)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/contributing/triaging-github-issues.md

issue: https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/issues/11810
---

## What is the aim of this document?

As a Gatsby core team, we've found patterns that help us effectively triage incoming Github issues, providing answers to the community's questions, identify bugs as well as opportunities to contribute to Gatsby core. Triaging issues is a great way to contribute to the Gatsby community and share your knowledge, without necessarily requiring a lot of deep context about the way the Gatsby codebase works.

We want to share these patterns with the broader community, so that if you're interesting in helping us triage, you're able to do so more effectively!

> This document should answer any questions you might have along the way. We’ll answer common questions, list guidelines and illustrate a decision tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this document we’ll answer common questions, list guidelines and illustrate a decision tree.
```

## What is first touch maintenance?

For Gatsby the first line of communication between a user and the team is the issue tracker on GitHub. Typically, every day 20-30 issues are opened -- that's one every hour!

> These issues could be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An opened issue could be:
```

- a question that can be answered immediately
- a bug report
- a request for a feature
- or a discussion on a complicated use case

As a first touch maintainer, you might sift through, triage, communicate and manage this first line of communication.

> They typically:

Reviewer: Who (or what) is "they" here?

Author: I wanted to be gender neutral so I didn't use he/she

Reviewer 2: To resolve both concerns maybe just say:

```suggestion
The first touch maintainer typically:
```

Reviewer 3: This could say "You will typically", to match the person from the previous sentence.

- answer questions that can be answered immediately

>   -test and reproduce possible bug reports and label them appropriately

Reviewer: Check the spacing at the start of this line to make sure the list item renders properly!

- communicate feature requests to the rest of the team and ensure a valid response
- enable discussions on complicated use cases, whether themselves or via the rest of team

## Why do we do first touch maintenance?

We do first touch maintenance so that:

- Questions are answered swiftly and correctly, therefore making users happy
- Bug reports are reproducible and the most relevant data is collected before someone jumps in with a fix

> - Unrelated issues are resolved swiftly so we don't spend too much time on them

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Unrelated issues are resolved promptly so we don't spend too much time on them
```

nit ;)

## What is unique to Gatsby?

Gatsby is unique among most open source projects because:

- Gatsby integrates with many third party tools (WordPress, Drupal, Contentful etc) via source plugins and hence the typical scope of issues is widened significantly
- Gatsby aims to be really beginner friendly (we want to be the new way someone gets started with web development) and this means that we need to accommodate a wide range of skill levels
- At Gatsby, we've defined a couple of metrics that we measure to ensure we're responsive and helpful to our open source community

## How do we do first touch maintenance?

### General Guidelines

> - **Be empathic.** The author of an issue might be asking something that’s obvious to you but that doesn’t mean it’s obvious to them - it's important to consider the issue from the author’s viewpoint. People often remember how you make them feel, not what you told them.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Be empathetic.** The author of an issue might be asking something that’s obvious to you but that doesn’t mean it’s obvious to them - it's important to consider the issue from the author’s viewpoint. People often remember how you make them feel, not what you told them.
```

Reviewer: I looked that up too as I'm more used to "empathetic", but "empathic" works here!

Author: I prefer empathetic too (empathic was a recommendation from @m-allanson)

Let's move to it since it seems to be more widely used!

- **Add context.** When answering an issue, it can be useful to link to existing documentation, issues, PRs, or provide related context. This means the issue can serve as a reference to future readers.
- **Encourage community contributions.** Getting people involved makes a huge impact. It’s often worth spending the time to write up a task as a `good first issue` instead of fixing the issue yourself. This can provide a low friction way for someone to get more involved in open source!
- **Give issue authors time to close their own issues.** Sometimes, it might feel like an issue is resolved but the author could have follow up questions. It's usually best to give them a day or two to close the issue themselves.

> ### Labelling

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Labeling
```

> Labelling helps group issues into manageable sets and also improves searchability and scannability. We have a set of labels that we use to group issues based on their type and status. While we want to limit adding too many labels, feel free to add one if it seems relevant and helps with this grouping!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Labeling helps group issues into manageable sets and also improves searchability and scannability. We have a set of labels that we use to group issues based on their type and status. While we want to limit adding too many labels, feel free to add one if it seems relevant and helps with this grouping!
```

US English vs. non-US English 🙃

> Labelling helps group issues into manageable sets and also improves searchability and scannability. We have a set of labels that we use to group issues based on their type and status. While we want to limit adding too many labels, feel free to add one if it seems relevant and helps with this grouping!

Reviewer: You could link this doc in there somewhere: https://www.gatsbyjs.org/contributing/how-to-label-an-issue/

Reviewer 3: 👍

> It's nice to update labels as the state of an issue changes or if the type of an issue changes, for example if a question becomes a feature request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's nice to update labels as the state of an issue changes or if the type of an issue changes, for example if a question becomes a feature request. This means labels are transient in nature and subject to being updated as progress is made on addressing issues.
```

Something you brought up that could be going to point out ^

> It's nice to update labels as the state of an issue changes or if for example, a question becomes a feature request or a bug report

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It's nice to update labels as the state of an issue changes or if the type of an issue changes, for example if a question becomes a feature request.
```

### Resolution Flow Chart

> 

Reviewer: It would be good to introduce this flow chart in prose here, so that people know what they'll get out of clicking the link. This is also the decision tree, right? We should be consistent with how we refer to it in this doc so people can tell more easily what you're talking about. Either "resolution flow chart" or "resolution decision tree" would probably work!

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure how accessible Whimsical is, but in the future, another thing that might be useful could be a described version of the flowchart too for accessibility. That way contributors using assistive technologies could understand our decision-making process for issue triaging as well.

Reviewer 5: I can work on a described version of the flowchart but I don't want to hold up this PR!

https://whimsical.co/QvuMgo31T2C3xcWbou8xhy

### Saved Replies

> https://github.com/orgs/gatsbyjs/teams/admin/discussions/3

Reviewer 4: Is this publicly accessible?

Also probably worth documenting when to use these and why.

Reviewer: If this is publicly accessible (it prompts me for a login, so probably not?), it would be good to have a sentence or two introducing the link.

## Bot

We have a bot that helps us automate some aspects:

> - Issues with a question mark in their title or starting with "how" are automatically labelled as questions

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Issues with a question mark in their title or starting with "how" are automatically labeled as questions
```

- Issues with an empty body are closed

> - Issues with no activity are marked stale after 20 days. They are then closed after another 10 days unless anyone comments saying not stale or adds the not stale label

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Issues with no activity are marked stale after 20 days. They are then closed after another 10 days unless there are additional comments or the "not stale" label is applied
```

## Frequently Asked Questions

> > When do I do a demo for an issue?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> When do I need to provide a reproduction for an issue?
```

> When a feature or pattern is not documented, it may be nice to make a demo to add clarity for the author and help future readers as well.

Reviewer 4: I'm a little confused by this?

By demo, do you mean reproduction, or do you mean something else here?

If you mean reproduction we should tweak this to be a little stronger, ideally--we'd always have a reproduction if it's able to be reproduced and is a bug.

Also https://gatsby.dev/reproduction is worth cross-linking here.

Reviewer 3: I think this is separate.  I'll add a section on bug reproductions.

> How much time do I spend on an issue?

Some issues might need more time than others and there isn’t any hard and fast rule. However, it's best to spend time on an issue after the relevant info and reproduction is available.

> > Do I have look at Discord?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Do I have to look at Discord?
```

You don’t have to. Some of us are active on Discord and you can be too if you like.

> Do I use the same issue to track documentation additions or open a new one?

If the issue describes the context well enough, then it is okay to update its title and use the same issue to track the addition of relevant documentation.

> When do I follow up on an issue?

If an author hasn’t responded to a comment for a week or two, it might be nice to follow up and ask if there’s anything else we can do to help. If the issue goes stale after that, our bot should be able to clean it up.

> What do I do if an issue relates to something upstream?

> It’s a good practise to open an issue in the upstream repository in cases like this but isn’t strictly necessary.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It’s a good practice to open an issue in the upstream repository in cases like this but isn’t strictly necessary.
```

Reviewer 4: Also, maybe define upstream?
